Okay, this is now on, and I'll put it over here.
If at any time you want me to shut it off, I'll shut it off.
The book is horrendous.
I have to submit a manuscript by March of 91, in the early stages of the research.
And you will not learn how to collect books in here.
Okay, so you don't have to give a locus for the collection, and otherwise you don't have to say it's on such and such a street and such a town.
Okay.
And from that point, Lisa... But it's easy to find out.
Yes.
But I think... I don't know whether... Well, what do you feel?
I don't know.
Let's... There's never been any publicity about us as collectors.
I mean, obviously... Madeline Stern wrote an article on women's collectors.
How many can be read on Stern?
And Western did.
He should.
Too bad Hamill and Barker did it.
But in fact, you should find a copy of an article that Francis Hamill wrote published in the, I think the Transactions of the Bibliographical Society in America called Some Unconventional Women.
It's women, bibliophiles, collectors, printers before 1800s.
And it would also be very interesting to know the real history of women and publishing and printing in American colonial America.
I'm not going to find that in particular.
But he's interested in collecting these.
No, but they're collectors.
Bibliophiles, they're collectors.
But you should have it historically as well, I think, since you are having a, there is a historic aspect of the book.
Well, I think I have to disprove Eugene Field's moronic basis that women don't collect.
And that's very easily... The women will be represented.
No, but it's interesting to see how really important they were to songs.
I think it's a short article.
It would be amusing to you.
And how recent is that article, as you said?
In the last couple of years?
No, it's only 20 years.
I'll be talking about starting last year, in any case.
It's Frances Hamel.
She was a Chicago bookseller.
Great bookseller.
The firm was called Hamel and Barkley.
There were two women.
That's famous, yeah.
And she... Well, I think, let's just start... It is interesting that you are a couple and you collect.
Would you say you collect independently of each other?
You have certainly separately defined collections.
I would say that we collect some books in consort and that we pursue certain books independently.
I think Lisa, far more than I, has built an incredible collection in the history of women, which, you know, it's very hard to evaluate a collection because one doesn't see all the ones that one can compare it to.
But as far as one can gather, it's one of the great collections.
How long have you been collecting, what was it?
Since the late, women's books were collecting.
Let's do both of them.
Women's books since the late 60s.
I've always been a packer.
Are you from Massachusetts?
No, I'm from Brooklyn.
You've been married how long?
We've been together since 1964.
We're about 25 years.
No, no, no, no, no, no.
The collection has been, you've been pursuing the collection in earnest.
Well, I didn't begin, the real, the really passionate collecting of women's books began in the late 50s.
Parallel time to the beginning of the revival of the women's books.
Was that the catalyst of the book?
You know, there were many women who were involved in the literature who don't collect books.
But you were a collector.
You said you were involved in a background.
Yeah, I always had books.
But her collecting instincts were sharpened and intensified once our relationship was established.
Being older than Lisa, obviously, I've been doing it far longer.
So there was a collection into which she merged, and then her own instincts for collecting had a way to express themselves.
I would say that.
I don't see the thing as very distinct, except for the women's books.
I think that's a distinctive, fantastic collection of material.
The other collecting, the early illustrated books, which was the original and central part of our collecting, but that also has become
That has slackened off to a degree simply because the material has become so scarce and the prices have become so awesome.
But I started collecting books literally when I was 13 years old.
I went to my first auction when I was about 13.
Did you bid your first book?
I bid a book.
I bought a 75-cent book.
Really?
What was it?
It was one of Kirshenbaum's relatives.
There were two book auctions on Fourth Avenue when I was a child.
One was called the American Book Auction, one was called the City Book Auction.
They were both run by Kirsch and Bounds, a descendant of whom is a very good artist, by the way, Jules Kirsch, by the way, who teaches at Des Moines, Iowa.
Yeah.
And I literally was either 13 and a half or 14, or the 18th century edition of one of Plato's Symposium for 75 centuries.
Did you know then, at age 13, that you were collected?
I had an instinct for collectivize, you know, I was a collector, you know.
But by the time I was 18, I knew it.
I was about 15 years.
I bought, instead of my plane, it was my first time.
And I was following those very best when I was supposed to be.
As a teenager, and a tremendous trouble with my parents, who, even though they could well afford it,
What was the focus of your collection in the early years?
Art books, I suppose.
So was mine.
Art books for the most books.
And at that time, it's interesting looking for women artists.
Somebody asked me last night about Colbert.
And when I began collecting and becoming interested in her, she was one of the few role models, one
I have one woman artist in the United States.
I don't have a woman artist in the United States.
I studied arts.
I studied arts in the United States.
And there was a public school in the United States.
And she was one of the few women artists that I discovered.
I certainly didn't discover her at school because nobody had COVID for that.
I think your mother had COVID.
My mother didn't have COVID since her after, I think, after I left the house.
Really?
It was Princeton in the United States.
How do you enjoy a collection like this?
How?
We play.
It's just endless.
Why does one collect?
I mean, that is a very complex and difficult question.
But that was, this is what you'll have to come up with.
We also collect, I mean, the early illustrated books, Lenny was interrupted and collected early illustrated books in specific areas, we've had to sell different
Parts of our collection.
Parts of our collection over the years because we haven't had the money to just keep buying.
Just keep buying.
And we don't only collect books.
It's only a small part of our collection.
Not a small, but one part.
It's a part of it.
We used to collect old master prints.
We still collect old master prints.
We sold many of them and now have begun recently again to buy old master prints.
We collect the Renaissance medals.
Bronzes.
Blackheads.
And I collect something called Memorial Brewery, which, again,
Nobody was interested in when I was buying it in the early 50s.
Let's go back a little bit.
You said you had to sell things?
Yeah.
Yeah, we had many collections.
You had to sell them, but you sold them because... We had to sell them.
Yes, we did.
We are what the French call an amateur marchand, collector-dealer.
Okay.
In other words, we're not dealers in any real sense, but the phrase is cogent, I think, because not being as rich as Paul Mellon, we can't only buy it.
From time to time, we get in trouble either with the government or with just great indebtedness.
Instead of paying taxes, we bought books.
And so in order to pay out the taxes, you have to sell books.
We, for example, had a great collection of early colored engraved books.
Can you give me a few examples?
Yeah, we had all of the great Gauthier's Daggerty books.
All of them.
We had all of them.
So the collection was complete.
Yes.
Virtually.
Well, everything that was complete.
Well, everything that you could possibly get.
And we had duplicates of certain things, like the little truffle book.
That's right.
How did you steal them?
What?
Terrible.
Oh, my God.
How did you come to this decision?
We had a great collection of prospective books.
We had a great collection of emblem books.
There are lots of areas that
Finish off.
Finish.
We couldn't acquire any more.
We had tried, one of our goals was to get every 16th century emblem looked.
That's a hard thing.
Today you can't get even the 17th century ones.
Well, we just sold a great book.
For the past week, we have two kids in school with tuition costs.
We sold a great book last week.
During the fair, actually.
Before the book.
Well, I wanted to talk about that because it's not fair to the dealer.
No.
No, it's not.
It's still not.
It's just a book, an 18th century book, an early natural history book in color, a fantastic book.
But we needed money.
We had two tools, you know.
Oh, you sold it to a dealer?
Yeah.
Is that generally how you send a book to dealers?
Well, the Goji Daggett's went through Sotheby's.
I've never sold a book.
I don't know what that would feel like.
It's all a book.
We sold, we sold.
The first sales we had to achieve many years ago in the late 60s, somebody who was involved in publishing Lenny's prints and dealing with his work went into bankruptcy and our income stuff.
And Lenny's... We had a correction of the works of Thomas Aikens.
And Lenny's tax, he taxed his paintings.
Five sculptures and four paintings.
And we sold him.
Today it would be worth the incalculable fortune, but we got a lot of money to have it, but nothing what it would be today.
Once you sold that... That was like the opening of the time.
That was probably the toughest thing I had to sell.
That's right.
Then the emblem books went, then the colorful goje dagaties went, then the perspective... We had a great collection of a kind of pottery called mocha, which is now between Palaka prices.
We had over three and a few pieces of it.
in the early 70s.
Were there any days in school?
One's at Chuck, one's at Yale.
I've got two girls coming along.
You just wait.
And then eight and seven tonight.
Yeah, our problem is never, all these people complain about finding stuff.
There's endless stuff to buy.
There's so much stuff, there's just not enough money.
Let me just throw you something out.
I'm talking to David Briggs, who's great.
He said, if you have $100 million to spend, and he said, don't laugh, because from where I'm sitting, I see Van Gogh's name is $53 million.
$100 million ain't so much money.
And he said, you know, for the price of two or three paintings.
That's right.
You could build one of the finest libraries in the world.
True.
And he said, because all of a sudden, the institutional money is no longer available, so that the private collectors who are buying
And also the people who have everything to sell are putting them up because they see the prices.
I think there's an extraordinary level of quality.
The prices are still awesome.
But you said, how did you get it all?
Yeah, how did you get it all?
Because you could grow one of the world's finest collections.
Yes, that's absolutely true.
When I began buying, no one was interested.
I mean, I have great delight in looking, there are certain books I leave the prices in, most of the books I have.
Can you give me a couple of examples?
Yeah, I have a wonderful, I have a Catherine, some, I don't use the word seminal, you say generative.
I think that's a good one.
In this context, it's a very kind.
Generative.
I do it as soon as it's left my book.
Okay, writer should be aware of it.
Well, give them some examples.
I'm interested not just in the ... One of the big distinctions between the women's books and the rest of the books we collect is the women's books are collected solely for content.
Right?
As opposed to the fabric of the book, the physical fabric of the book.
Which is why the other books are collected.
None of those books are ever read, aren't they?
However, within the collection of women's books,
There are books that have been produced by women.
That are fans of them.
Women printers, illustrators, women binders, etc.
Lisa collects everything.
No, I don't.
Yes, you do.
They don't collect travel books.
There is a bibliophile.
A woman who does collect women travelers, who I believe is a member of the brilliant books.
Mr. Newtruck, is he still a librarian?
He could probably fix you up.
I bought a little binding by Catherine Adams, a darling little book.
She was, do you know the name?
Gilderville and the book behind her.
No, she was a common standard.
Sarah Friedo and Catherine Adams were the two great turn of the century.
The name I get, by the way, I check out.
Pardon me, we're just checking.
Yeah, we're doing fine.
I bought a Catherine Adams.
Ruth Mortimer, in fact, was here visiting last winter.
And I showed her my little Catherine Adams binding.
which still had the original price, I think, of five or ten pounds written inside.
Smith had just acquired theirs, I believe, for $5,000, so I was quite excited.
That's an example.
Another example.
How many volumes did you say you had?
Those were all women.
That whole wall behind you is all women.
The room inside is women's bibliographies.
My study is full of black women's history and 19th century American women's history.
You have no idea.
I have no idea.
Have you cataloged it?
Sure.
When we lived in England, I had a secretary who was working.
It's a good deal that is cataloged.
No, no, not any longer than that.
I said, but a lot of it has been cataloged.
And we had a rudimentary catalog, probably about, I would say, 20% of the books are on card.
And we have a computer, and neither of us are interested in computers, operating computers, etc.
And I'd really have to go about buying a hardware drive for the computer,
But the interesting thing is that the greatness of Lisa's collection is not printed books.
I don't know.
Well, it's not true.
It's the family.
It's pamphlets.
It's all the throwaways, all the things that... And manuscripts.
And manuscripts.
And journals.
That's what Francis Parkman did right after the Civil War.
And he went down south and did all these pictures of the family and almanacs.
Well, tell him about your... About the Clarence collection.
At least that bought a collection of 600 papers, for instance.
Really?
I don't know.
Oh, yeah.
Oh, yeah, these are all books.
I mean, when you're going to have a great number of
You know, the 19th, 16th century book, this is a hope you were mentioning.
Oh, that's, it's not holy.
You do have a hope, but not that one.
That's true.
Isn't that easy?
No, no, no.
Yeah.
That's true.
Oh, this is really wonderful.
Oh, that's a very great thing.
Oh, is it?
A tooth.
It says, oh, that's a tooth.
Yes, sir.
Look at this copy.
You'll never see this book like that.
It's not talking.
It gets ragged.
It's used so much.
This is wonderful.
And it's a response to not to identify women.
That's the title?
Yeah, it was a harangue.
And it is... Just read this title, just so I can pick it up a little bit.
It's John Elmer's response.
It's a... A problem with a clancy subject against the late-blown blank concerning the government of women.
Wherein he considered all such reasons as a stranger's ways made, and as he has with his brief extortation to do it.
It's, um, it's, uh, Strock for, uh, Strock for, uh, 1659.
Good.
A lot of wonderful books.
And you've got a sentence here by Charlotte Blanquist, and what is... Well, he says a letter of Charlotte Blanquist, or a letter?
A wonderful letter.
And a Mrs. Gaskell letter?
In it, she announces her intention.
Well, she's written the letter.
I have to look him up.
What does it?
I'll be right back.
What kinds are you?
Come on, John.
What kind of study?
Chuck Russell.
The breed.
The breed, yeah.
They're ratters bred for stability.
How many volumes did you see?
I don't know.
We've never counted them.
We must have 30,000 books in that.
Wow.
Do you think?
It must be something like that.
But that's irrelevant.
Well, I don't think it's irrelevant.
One book can be so fantastic as to
collect a number of games, just not believe in this, you know.
For example, if I climb up and climb, just be careful, that's all.
Take, for example, this book.
It's the book I mean.
You know where they all are, too.
I know most of them.
This is one of the rarest books by a great...
16th century engraver, Crispin van der Post.
Do you know that name?
He's one of the Flemish greatest engravers of the 16th century.
And it's a book of the nymphs of the Amstel.
Amstel is the great river in Amstel, right?
These are Flemish and Dutch ladies of aristocratic and upper middle class quality dressed as shepherds.
Dressed in the costumes of shepherdess that week.
This is an incredibly scarce book.
What has numbers got them to?
I could buy a thousand books for what this book is worth.
How long have you had that book?
I didn't recommend it.
I know.
It must be back.
It's before we moved to England.
Where is it, just so I can write that down?
What is the name of the book?
Yes.
It's called The Bouquet de Belche.
The Bouquet of Shepherdesses.
We argue about shelving.
Well, so to talk about numbers of books becomes irrelevant.
So you have favorites, then, clearly.
I'll tell you one of my greatest musicals.
Sort of a book I thought we would never own.
Oh my God, look at that.
This is a book that belonged to a cardinal, and part of the original binding is preserved, and rather nicely preserved in a 19th century binding, which has surrounded the original central portion of it.
It's a book, a rather common book, of the life of Thomas Aquinas in 30 engravings,
executed after drawings by Otto Vanius, who was the teacher of Peter Paul Rubens, published in 1610.
This is the most beautiful posse, colored in a way that is breathtaking, gilded and painted.
It just takes my breath away.
It's the kind of book we really never aspire to.
That's right.
It's breathtaking, isn't it?
It's the sort of book you see as a pure Morgan art.
Without being specific, where do you find something like this?
We're lucky.
We found out a bookseller who didn't understand.
He thought the book was, what, three times its uncolored value.
It was colored by a very fine artist.
But you knew that on part of instinct.
I knew, excuse me, I knew who Aquavanius was.
I knew he was Ruben's teacher.
He was a theoretician and artist in his own right.
That's the quality of the painting.
Well, you didn't know the book before you saw it.
I've never seen it, no.
But I've been looking at books now since I was 13 years old, and I'm 67.
It's a long time.
I'm interested as well.
But I was interrupting Lisa.
Yeah, this is an interesting angle that I want to pursue.
You are doubly interesting to me, not only for your extraordinary collection, but for the fact that you are a noted creative artist.
Indeed.
And there aren't that many that I know of.
Artists, serious collectors.
And I wonder if you could maybe talk about the truth.
Rembrandt?
Rembrandt.
Yeah, I didn't know that, sir.
Oh, sure.
You didn't know that?
No, no worries.
In fact, the control of his business and money was taken out of his hands by his wife and so on.
And the creditors.
He was profligate.
He collected everything.
He was collecting over what?
Everything.
A higher level.
He collected paintings, he collected prints, he collected armor, he collected bronzes, he collected drawings, he collected anything that was beautiful.
Richard Torment to artist art.
Because there was an auction.
And a catalog of this.
A bundle of drawings.
A bundle of prints.
So they would really like to know exactly what it was.
They know a good deal of what he had.
He had renaissance men all the time.
Well, let's talk, when you look at that gorgeous book, I don't expect you to explain the springs of your creativity, but I wonder if there's any kind of... What the connection is?
Yeah, do you get any energy from your... I would think so.
It would be very hard to find any direct relationship
But there can be no question that there is a relationship.
Particularly, just recently, we've been making a collection of portrait books.
It's an area that no one is interested in.
I mean, there are a half a dozen... That's a good opportunity for the collectors.
Indeed, there is.
There's a half a dozen great portrait books that everybody knows and all the great libraries have.
But beyond that, there are hundreds and hundreds that nobody knows about.
Name one or two.
What are the famous ones?
Well, I could show them to you.
They're totally unknown, because collections of portraits tend to be boring for the most part.
They aren't always, but they tend to be.
And they tend to be, as a result, a drug on the market.
The booksellers don't like them.
However, since I started this collection, that market is slowly running.
I've had a direct effect
And every portrait book that comes along is offered to me.
That's something that we can see, and it's happened historically about in many areas.
I mean, creating interest, educating people, people seeing the things.
That's right.
For example, do you know what watch papers are?
No.
Well, when people had those very big watches, and when they brought them to the watchmaker for reparation, the watchmaker would often make a note of what he did on a piece of paper, which was engraved with his name and locus, usually.
And from that commercial interest, which started in the 18th century, a device
grew where lovers would give sailors or someone going off on a long trip, or just generally, a token of affection to keep in their watch.
A little watercolor watch.
A little watercolor.
Well, we have the largest collection in the world of those.
Really?
Naturally.
But if anyone comes on the market, it comes to the market.
The American Access Clarence Society has a collection.
I will show you some if you like.
The AES is wonderful.
precisely that kind of thing i mean they have all the ferry tickets oh sure that's very crucial no i mean it i mean that's how history takes on a graphic side a reality if you well just that if you have a if you have an 1812 ferry ticket that ferry becomes a palpable
in one's imagination instead of just being a figment of one's imagination.
The presence of the ticket lends reality to the idea.
Isn't that true?
Well, it's generally true.
It's wonderfully and very eloquently stated.
You think you must
I would bet that you are of a spirit of Sir Thomas Phillips who collected it.
No, we can't compare it.
Nobody can compare it.
No, certainly not in volume, but in... And he was rich.
He never had to start it.
He had three enormous houses and reduced his family to, no, three.
Three and five rooms.
He had three rooms.
He filled up seven?
But he probably looked and knew his books.
Most of the cases were unopened.
Well, the great story is that in the 60s, they found the only known copy of the first volume of Caxton's The Metamorphosis.
The only known copy.
And it was buried in a pile of junk.
And they say, you know, this alone justifies everything that St.
Thomas fell.
It's a pity it all didn't order the British Library.
They had chance.
He was a violent anti-catholic, Phyllis.
They had a chance.
And that guy, Popsini.
No, that has nothing to do with it.
Let me say that they had a shot and they could have paid, but who knows?
But it is shameful that they don't.
Let me ask... What was that, Librarian Popsini, was it?
Yes.
And Phyllis hated him.
That's correct.
That's right.
As well, he said that his son-in-law and his daughter
were never to be allowed in the house.
And no Catholic, Catholics, without exception, were not to be allowed in the house.
He hated it.
He really hated it.
It was crazy.
Nicholas Parker was in Worcester a couple of weeks ago.
He seized the moment.
And I foolishly said, you know, Phillips was crazy.
And of course, he finished the Monday.
He did the Monday by the hungry.
And he looked at me like, I wouldn't say he was crazy.
I mean, we need to draw that conclusion.
Nicholas Barker is crazy, not Phillips.
Nicholas Barker is an interesting guy.
Nicholas Barker is incredible.
He's unique.
He really is.
He can talk about anything.
On anything and write books on anything as fast as you can say it.
Well, he did the foreword to that garden sale.
Yeah.
This is going to be one of my big stories, by the way, this garden sale.
Is that Have No More?
Haven No More.
Have No More.
Do you know him, by the way?
Is it Haven or Haven?
It's Have No More.
If you work it out, it's Haven O. Moore.
Have.
No.
Moore.
Do you think that's a Susan?
No, no, no.
It's been speculated.
I'll shut up the tape recorder and tell you an interesting story.
Let's tell you an interesting story.
When you run out of money, what happens?
You have to still buy books.
So I got interested in the book.
from about 1895 to the First World War as a physical object, right?
So content is really not relevant here?
No interest in content whatsoever.
These are books in marvelous condition, bought entirely for their binding.
Like these.
That's a great, great.
And that's an island garden in leather.
That's why it's here.
But that's fabulous.
That's a masterpiece.
A real masterpiece.
Do you know the artist?
I never knew her in any other context.
What, that's a lady named Greenwood?
Yeah, a lady named Greenwood or something.
Greenwood?
Amelia Watts.
She lives in Florida or something like that.
She's alive?
No, she did live in Florida.
They really pulled the place right.
Now, do you think they did the type after they did the place or before?
I think it was done together.
I think so.
I mean, someone did.
They were done separately, printed separately.
They'd done the type, then they were printed, you know, and then trimmed.
So this is what you see.
And I love the books found in paper, yellowbacks.
Try to find them.
Michael Sablier had quite a collection of yellowbacks.
Oh, yes.
And he was involved in these research.
And he doesn't have a chance.
Okay, I'll get that in.
Is that good?
No, I bought all of these books for a dollar, two dollars, three dollars.
Now you can't buy them anymore.
And you know what else?
Yeah, not the last, uh, POS.
Really?
Oh, um, yeah, there was, well, there was a piece on Jenkins in, uh,
And the New Yorker.
Is that the piece?
No, this is in the TLS.
Really?
Do you know Eric Cohen?
The name's familiar.
He writes a column in the TLS called Remainders.
Yeah.
Eric Cohen, huh?
He writes a column called Remainders.
Well, did you read the New Yorker piece on Jenkins?
No.
Well, he just leaves it.
that the police think when you said that this is very good it's walnut raisin
I was mentioning that I have a copy of The Ambassadors that was owned by Sarah Owen Jewett and then Willa Cather.
And I have a number of books that belong to Willa Cather.
Do you know the Cather-Jewett connection?
Sarah Jewett was her mentor, was her support as a writer.
She's a wonderful writer.
When Willa Cather was editing or working at McClure's magazine, she said, be careful.
Don't bring your wife away on this class, essentially, like you said.
And then she wrote the introduction to The Country of Pointe-Croze.
Does your collection come right into the... Right up to now.
Because I'm a pack rat.
During the 60s and 70s, my involvement in the women's women, I never threw anything out.
So I have, and in fact, I made an exhibition in 19, well, 15 years ago, I made an exhibition commemorating the 10th anniversary of Women's Studies at the University of Massachusetts.
And I used material from the 60s and 70s, which not,
not solely from my own collection, but the archives at UMass and the Sophia Smith collection.
So I go right up.
I don't collect that actively.
I have it because my instincts are to keep everything.
Is it important, however, that the first edition and the final?
I have them because I had them when they were issued.
Are you talking about my early books, the books I collect?
No, I mean the ones with the contemporary books.
I don't collect contemporary books at all.
Well, what I willy-nilly have
is contemporary Sema from the sixties and seventies.
And books that I, of course, fought to read when I became interested in women's things.
Would either of you describe yourselves as bibliomaniacs?
Correct.
Wouldn't you describe it?
Indeed, yeah.
Well, the title of my book, by the way, is Gentle Madness.
Gentle Madness.
I mean, you know, I'm delighted when I buy something that the AAF doesn't have.
And when I get a postcard from Mark McCarson, who says, damn, could we Xerox the title page?
I think his name is Zinman, you know, a collector by the name of Zinman?
He will buy things, and he knows that the AAS doesn't have it.
I don't do that.
You don't have it, right?
No, no.
No, I don't do that, in fact.
I wouldn't do that.
They've been extremely generous to me.
It's my favorite research library to work in.
It's quite wonderful.
I love it.
any Phyllis Wheatley material, including manuscripts, that I wanted.
But we're both members of you.
We were both just elected, right.
But when I received a postcard from Mark, because I had ordered an item from a book catalog, and I didn't know that I had bought something that the AAS didn't have a copy of complete until I received a very witty postcard from Mark.
cursing me, and then asking for permission to have, could they see my copy in zero?
They look to the long run, too, you know.
Of course, I think they can ask them.
Which brings up another interesting question.
What happens to others?
I think there's some facts in that.
I'll tell you something.
The book about this, you will be discussed.
I'll tell you something very... an interesting, anecdotal story.
When we were moving back to America... Do you want to turn everything off?
I don't know.
It's up to you whether you... It's not, it's not... If you don't want me to use it, by the way, I would have to get releases from you guys at some point anyway.
When we were moving back to America from England, we lived in England for almost 10 years.
This is what you should say.
I didn't imagine that we'd find a place that we could house all our books in.
I didn't know what we were going to be doing with our books.
And I had done... I don't think you should tell this story.
You shouldn't?
Too nasty for them?
Sell it off the record?
I'll shut it off.
Okay.
You know Warren Beck.
This was an empty two-story space with sliding glass doors and windows on that side.
We've been here since 1982 then.
83.
Just in time, at the end of 83, just in time, for the first Jackson campaign.
How do you define that?
Well, I define my life in those terms.
Political terms?
Very, yeah.
I was a delegate from Massachusetts for the convention, the last convention.
I ran a campaign in Western Massachusetts.
A delegate for?
Jackson.
That's what?
Not for Michael, no.
Didn't you know?
We ran a fundraiser for him.
In 1974, before he came and courted me.
Michael did.
And we raised lots of money for him, and he made great speech.
Made lots of promises.
I mean, Cam is, you know,
I'm really very good on one of his reasons.
I'm a very liberal guy.
He got elected, this was his first term as governor, and he did the opposite of everything he said.
So he was actually elected in one of his reasons.
He has a pure, pure opportunity.
He is?
And he's, I hate to say he's a liar.
He's on the tape.
That's always my tape.
See, I define my life in those terms in some ways.
Yeah.
Let's go back to books.
There was one interesting question.
I think when you were pointing out that exquisite book, that you didn't even know existed, but you knew it was wonderful when you saw it and how important it was.
Oh, not to Chris Winterfell.
Which book?
The one with what color?
And you said, try to find something like this and you'll never find it.
Do you know what you're looking for?
I mean, are there gaps in the collection like that?
No, it doesn't work.
Do you really cry?
Do you feel?
Perhaps Lisa has more of a sense of that, I think.
Where a specific book by a specific woman needs to be had.
With me, it's pure serendipitous.
It's a serendipitous event.
It's a serendipitous event for me as well, because nobody's done any of this.
I don't know that they exist.
The scholarship is just happening.
So you're a pioneer, really, in what you're doing.
Yeah.
Oh, absolutely.
Absolutely.
There's very little work.
I mean, the whole burgeoning women's studies thing is really a very recent piece of good.
I mean, it's the past...
15 years.
Can we say, and we can discuss it later, that you offered this library to a school without identifying it?
I don't think we should.
It's not really.
But let's not look at it from that negative side.
How about the positive side?
Do you think at some point we'll have a home in an institution?
Except for the children, I think.
I hope it will.
You know, the trouble is that certainly, well, at this point, one of the kids is extremely interested in involvement.
That's great.
And who knows?
I mean, what a great start this would be.
Great start for a new job.
My wife thinks, you know, we've got to open up books.
I mean, it would be very nice.
I mean, I have thought that the collection should be kept, the women's collection should be kept intact, and it should go to an institution, an institution that really would benefit from having the books.
An institution like Spelman in Atlanta, or... It's a sort of a collection that you couldn't put together with any... I mean, you can put half of it together, but the other half isn't unique, I think.
My script material, the ephemeral material material.
You know, it's interesting.
You go back to David Redden's quote with a hundred million dollars.
But a hundred million dollars assumes the stuff is available.
You can buy a great library.
You could formulate a wonderful library.
I mean, if you gave me a hundred million dollars now, I would go out and buy a wonderful book.
But I wouldn't necessarily be able to find everything that we have.
You didn't replicate what you had, particularly in your grace.
Well, and neither, neither.
In the ephemeral, that tends to be so scarce.
I mean, the Library of Congress calls upon these No, not the Library of Congress.
The Stanton Anthony paper says the Library of Congress was not complete.
If they could Xerox, some of her journals, have complete their No, no, no, no, you have it wrong.
You have it wrong.
Well, I thought, I'd like to get that right, though.
That's interesting.
Yeah.
I have, we own a, the most complete run of the revolution, which was a newspaper that was published by Stephen B. Anthony and Parker Killsbury in the 19th century.
And I've been working on and off over the years as a consultant for the Stanton Anthony Papers Project, which is located at the University of Massachusetts and Amory.
And they are doing a complete microfilm edition of all the manuscript material and printed material.
This is your stuff.
No, it's not all my stuff.
But I mean... No, no.
But... It turns out that as they were searching for copies of The Revolution for microfilms, places that thought they had it complete, like the Sufriessness question, were not complete.
And the missing issues were... I didn't want them to use my whole...
But they took the missing issues from my part of the revolution, for the Microfilm edition.
Oh, yes.
Interesting.
I'm sorry.
How do they find out about you?
How do these places like this work?
Well, I've worked with, well, the Stanton Anthony Papers Project are the people that I've been working with.
So they know.
So it's a small network, in other words.
I bought a few years ago two letters of Susan B. Anthony.
You can publish this.
This is interesting.
I wrote two letters from a Texas book dealer, not Jenkins, of Susan B. Anthony.
They're wonderfully interesting letters.
They're early Anthony letters.
They are about the suffrage campaign in the Midwest.
They had belonged to a historical society and a library in Kansas.
And that collection then went to the
University of Washington Library, no, the State Library of the State of Washington and Lindsay Washington.
I bought two letters at a book viewer's, and I automatically, when I get letters of, there are certain sites that are recording, like all of them are Goldman's letters are being worked on in California, Stanton Anthony's letters are being worked on here.
So I sent Xeroxes to the editors.
The editors, one of them called me and said, I've got bad news for you.
She said, well, the two letters that you bought are stolen.
And they knew where the letters were from, who owned the letters.
They were stolen from the Library of the State of Washington.
So they wrote a letter to the librarians of the State Library, who wrote back to them.
And ultimately, the resolution is no resolution that the State Library is very delighted that they're in a safe place, period.
They've never pursued the letters.
Isn't that interesting?
So this went on for a year.
This went on for a year.
I still owed the dealer, you know, 200 bucks, because these were not inexpensive letters.
And I didn't pay him the rest of the balance until I knew that I owned the letters.
So I owned the letters.
Did anyone ever ask where he got the letters?
The person, the thief has already, there were two of them.
They've stolen many other things.
and one of them was serving time.
But the interesting thing is that the librarian was delighted that there were anything found.
The librarian made no move to recover the stolen goods.
He took the problem out of his hand.
Never heard that.
Have you ever become, I hesitate to use the word apathetic, but bored with the collection?
No.
Roger started it at the local library at Harvard.
He's the editor of Bostonia, I've changed for Richard Stone.
I don't think it was the embarrassment of that piece that I would.
His name is Roger Stein.
We'll tell you a nice Roger Stein.
He's wonderful.
He said he'd be interested in knowing why some people stopped collecting
as much as to know why they start.
Do lots of people stop?
Well, a few.
I mean, Houghton, I think.
Yeah, that belittered me.
Well, Hornblood is another one.
We were at that sale.
At the Houghton.
And he was there, and we watched him rubbing his hands and counting the shackles.
And Roger did not mention Houghton, by the way.
I mentioned Houghton.
He didn't mention a few others.
Why didn't he give it to the Houghton?
Well, he gave him the building, I guess.
He doesn't need the money.
No.
And he's still around, I guess.
In fact, he's working on the next anniversary.
Roger is exceedingly discreet, and he never mentioned after Houghton.
But when he brought that up, it's true to me, Houghton, the man whose name, you know, who's building his name for it, is probably the greatest example of that.
Houghton owns a copy, when I was doing the Wheatley exhibition, Houghton owns a copy of Paradise Lost.
Owns or owns, he still owns?
Houghton's library.
The library owns a copy of
No, the library owned a copy of Paradise Lost that was, what would you like?
No, just .
.
a man called Watson, who you would know as Watson and the Shark, you know, the great Copley painting of the man in the water with his leg off.
That's Watson.
Really?
Right.
And he's being rescued by a black man on the rest.
Okay.
Watson met Wheatley in London and presented her with a copy.
He was the Lord Mayor.
No, no, no.
He was not yet the Lord Mayor.
Sorry, Lenny.
He became the Lord Mayor of London.
He was not very good politically.
He was lousy.
But he gave Phyllis Wheatley a copy of Milton's Paradise Law.
And after Wheatley's death... With a nice inscription.
Right.
After Wheatley's death, her husband sold the copy at Houghton.
And I wanted to borrow that, the Lovely Association copy, for my exhibition.
Here's the speculation, of course, did he meet her, did he have this... That is nice.
...because of her being a young black woman.
He had been rescued by a black person, et cetera, et cetera.
So I wanted to borrow the copy from Houghton.
I mean, they have, in the card catalog, they have inches of copies of Paradise Law.
This is not a first edition.
This is not, you know.
Association copies.
So Roger didn't want to lend me the copy because it was in a very shaky binding.
And I thought, well, maybe we could have the binding restored.
If it went out, we could give it to somebody who does our binding restation.
But it was really an enormous task.
It was a folio.
And he was dittering and dittering.
And he wasn't going to lend me the copy until we made an agreement.
We shouldn't publish this either.
That Leonard would make him a drawing of Phyllis Wheatley.
And I got my little... That's not a bad story.
I don't think he can use, but...
I don't think he'd like to see it published.
Right, and I got to borrow... The book is 90,000 words, so trust me, it's... I was able to borrow the... We'll go over his stuff, by the way.
I'm going to transcribe the Britain stuff, and, you know, I expect that we're going to have to sign off on some things.
I don't know, but, you know, there will be no surprises in this book.
Okay.
That's a sweet story.
That's a great story.
So is that what happened?
I borrowed it.
He got a wonderful drawing.
I am going to turn this tape around because I know it's about to run out and everything.
I'm just getting anxious.